---
layout: page
title: calendar
---

1. week
{:toc}

## Introduction (Aug 20) 

Welcome (back) to the History of Early Latin America. This week, your only responsibility is to carefully read over the syllabus, the course requirements, and to plan for you participation in class! Make sure you understand what the coursework requirements are, and also some general recommendations on how to read, take notes, and think about weekly material.

This semester, I’ve decided not to assign a general textbook for this
class. I hope that the decision will save you some money, but it also puts
the onus on you to join our synchronous sessions and follow through with
the other work. My lectures will essentially function as your textbook– providing the overview necessary to situate and understand your readings. Again, it is imperative that you come to class, and that you take notes. You are responsible for everything we discuss in the lecture. This means, you really need to take notes.

If you struggle with note-taking, or have never taken a humanities lecture course before, you will need to think about, and put effort into improving your note-taking. Take a look at these resources, and find a system that works best for you:



1. [Effective Note-taking in
   Lectures](https://www.cc-seas.columbia.edu/node/31875).  
2. [The Pen is Mightier than the
   Keyboard](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/0956797614524581).  
3. [How to Take Better
   Notes](https://collegeinfogeek.com/how-to-take-notes-in-college/).  

In addition to taking notes during lecture, you need to be an active
reader of the pieces we’re assigning. This means using either paper or pdf
tools to highlight and markup the assignments. We will be discussing this
over the course of the semester, especially how to approach strange texts
with unfamiliar concepts.


## Premodern Societies I (Aug 25)

The immigrants to what we now call the Americas by land and cruising the coasts. The civilizations that evolved from their wanderings were highly complex and advanced. We begin the semester considering their emergence, and the revolutionary domestication of Zea mays that made it possible. To this day, there is no single crop or animal more central to the US economy and its food system than corn.

This week we look at commonalities among most premodern societies, and
then at the Maya.

**Live Lecture:** On Sedentary Societies

* Mann, Charles C. "1491” The Atlantic Monthly (March 2002).

**The Maya**

Please watch [Popol
Vuh](https://video-alexanderstreet-com.proxy.lib.utk.edu/watch/popol-vuh),
and my own brief lecture on Canvas.

* Thompson, J. Eric. “The Meaning of Maize for the Maya.” in Gilbert M. Joseph and Timothy J. Henderson, eds., The Mexico Reader: History, Culture, Politics (Durham: Duke University Press, 2002), pp. 86-91.  

* Anonymous. “The Popul Vuh.” In Joseph and Henderson, eds., The Mexico Reader, pp. 79-85.


## Premodern Societies II (Sep 1)

The collapse of Classical Maya society did not mean the disappearance of
the Maya. Indeed, Maya-speaking communities continue to form integral
parts of Mexican and Guatemalan society today, along with other Central
American states. This week, we consider the successors and inheritors of
the Mesoamerican cultural world once dominated by the Maya, with the rise
of the Mexica in the central valley of Mexico. Then, we turn to South
America for an introduction to the third great sedentary empire of the
pre-Conquest period, the Inka of the Andes. As you read and attend lecture
this week, consider the influence of environmental factors on the
emergence of these civilizations along with their religious and social
practices.

**Live:** Mexica

* Burkhardt, Louise M. “Mexica Women on the Home Front: Housework and Religion in Aztec Mexico” in Schroeder, Susan et al. Indian Women of Early Mexico, (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1997), pp. 25-54.

**Asynch:** Inka

* Mary Strong, Art, Nature, and Religion in the Central Andes (Austin: Univ. of Texas Press, 2012): pp. 17-58.

## Premodern Societies III  (Sep 8)

With a foundation in the pre-Conquest Americas, this week we turn to the Iberian Peninsula, the close-in Atlantic islands, and to Africa to look at the roots of conquest in the so-called “Old World.” Consider the culture of conquest cultivated by Isabella and Ferdinand in the 1490s, and also what lessons Iberians learned of conquest and expansion in their control of Atlantic Islands and the trade in enslaved captives with West Africa.

**Live:** Across the Atlantic

* “Las Siete Partidas: Laws on Jews.”

* “King Ferdinand, Marriage Concessions (1469)” in Jon Cowans, ed. Early Modern Spain: A Documentary History (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2003): 7-9.

* “Surrender Treaty of the Kingdom of Granada (1491)” in Cowans, Early Modern Spain: 15-19.

* “Decree of Expulsion of the Jews (1492)” in Cowans, Early Modern Spain: 20-23.

**Asynch:** 

* John K. Thornton, “The African Background,” A Cultural History of the Atlantic World, 1250–1820 (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2012), pp. 60-100.


## The Early Conquest (Sep 15) 

Prior to sailing across the Atlantic, Columbus learned from Portuguese and
Spanish expansion into the Atlantic Islands and down the coast of Africa
economic models for colonial exploitation. Conquering and enslaving native
populations, importing captive Africans for enslaved labor, cultivating
sugar for export to Europe, and improving sea-going technology were all in
place before he received Royal support. This week, we look at the
transplantation of an Atlantic model of conquest and exploitation to the
Caribbean, and at its religious critics. Pay close attention to the
arguments made by Friars Montesinos, Pane, and de las Casas, and whether
they offer an alternative colonial model, or an alternative to
colonialism?

**Live:** Caribbean Conquests

* Christopher Columbus’s Log, excerpted in English. Focus on period after Oct. 11.

* The Requerimiento

**Asynch:** The Critique

Here are three critiques from early on, and Laws that the Crown
promulgated in response.



* Bartolomé de Las Casas, Brief Account of the Devastation of the Indies, excerpt.

* Antonio Montesinos, “Advent Sermon”

* “The Relación of Fray Ramón Pane (c. 1494-1496)”

* “The Laws of Burgos. 1512-1513”

## On the Mainland (Sep 22)

In the 1520s and 1530s, the Spanish Empire expanded to cover much of
Central and South America. At the time, Spaniards and their native allies
both imagined themselves as conquering the controlling empires of
Mesoamerica and the Andes. Who, then, conquered whom? In the early 16th
century, did native allies with the Spanish imagine themselves as
collaborators in European domination? If not, what did they imagine they
were doing?



## (Sep 29)

## (Oct 6)

## (Oct 13)  

## (Oct 20)

## (Oct 27)

## (Nov 3)

## (Nov 10)

## (Nov 17)

## (Nov 24)

**Final Due:**







